take a look at Monaco Monaco Luxembourg
Liechtenstein these are countries where
their measure of wealth their GDP per
capita at purchasing power parity is
double the wealth of the United States
these are the wealthiest countries in
the world does it matter well if it
didn't matter politicians like Bernie
Sanders wouldn't be out there lying
claiming that the United States is the
wealthiest country in the world never
forget not for one moment that you are
living in the wealthiest country in the
history of the world seeing the wealth
and poverty of the American people in
perspective relative to other real world
examples he's important it matters it's
going to inform our choices as a society
as a democracy etc etc and lying to
people and reinforcing this kind of
baseless egomaniacal delusion that the
United States is an extraordinarily
wealthy country how does that help
anyone in the English language we have
this peculiar contrast between something
being incorrect and something being
wrong never forget not for one moment
that you are living in the wealthiest
country in the history of the world many
many many politicians make this claim
that the United States of America is the
wealthiest country in the world and I
understand they are normally making that
claim in a sort of morally
well-intentioned context like they mean
to suggest to you that the United States
of America does not have an excuse for
failing to solve its own problems that
the United States of America should hold
itself to a higher standard should do
something better or more charitable or
more excellent because because because
the United States of America is they say
the wealthiest country in the world it
is incorrect to claim that the United
States is the wealthiest country world
and also it is wrong nothing how do you
feel about the quality of the education
you're getting in some questions we
don't have books in the classes oh we do
have books they're falling apart
and what about the quality of your
teachers
my teachers are the best they work as
hard as they can but how how can you
work that hard in the class and when you
have to balance two or three jobs and
also try to support your own family so
it's hard on them and it's just they're
working two or three jobs yes so my
teachers tell us like I gotta go I have
to go to my second job I should go pick
up my own kids so yeah my teachers
deserve better
they sure do then you deserve better
never forget not for one moment that you
are living in the wealthiest country in
the history of the world when you look
at this chart do you see the United
States as the wealthiest country in the
world
well this country though if the world's
ever known no this is a chart showing
you um gross domestic product per capita
at purchasing power parity right and if
anyone looked at this chart they'd say
well the United States is less wealthy
than Switzerland but slightly more
wealthy than other ones so if you think
of the Netherlands as a normal country
that means the United States is also
just a normal country if you think of
the Netherlands as an extraordinarily
wealthy country then nevertheless the
United States is ordinary precisely
because it matches that same mark of
extraordinariness the United States is a
country when you look at these numbers
that is just slightly wealthier than
Germany right this is not the only
statistic but this is one statistic that
very rapidly gives you a sense of wealth
and poverty in a country it's not
calibrated to to finally but when you
look at these numbers guess what Ireland
is much much wealthier than the United
States America that's not a rounding
error that's not just a few percentage
points it turns out Ireland really is
wealthier than the United States America
and this has certain kinds of ethical
implications okay you may not know this
Ireland spends less on the military than
any other country in Europe they spend
less on the military than almost any
country in the world they have a very
very small military budget they're
actually a couple countries that are
proud
to have an even lower what's great
budget than Ireland well who's gonna
help Ukraine why is it the American
taxpayer who is right now helping
Ukraine who is gonna help Cyprus the
island of Cyprus all right there were
British Armed Forces there in the past
that were Canadian Armed Forces as
peacekeepers who's gonna help Cyprus
half the island is under occupation from
the Turks okay these things cost money
it's the British taxpayer paying for
troops in Cyprus it's the American
taxpayer paying for troops in Ukraine
right who's who's gonna provide military
assistance to Ukraine not Ireland well
if you know that Ireland is one of the
wealthiest countries in the world if you
know that Ireland is actually
significantly wealthier than the United
States of America some of those
questions some of those questions and
moral responsibility with military
budgets and humanitarian aid they start
to be asked and a slightly different
matter no this is not a groundbreaking
tremendously important issue but I'm
raising it as an example because this
puts the wealth of the United States in
context America is not the wealthiest
country in the world when people visit
the United States America from Europe
they aren't impressed
they don't think wow what an amazingly
wealthy country and there's a reason for
that it's by the same token when most
Americans visit Ireland they don't think
Ireland is an amazingly wealthy country
Ireland is somewhat wealthier than the
United States but you know what that
still is at the top of the scale we can
keep going up up up here take a look at
Monaco Monaco Luxembourg Liechtenstein
these are countries where their measure
of wealth their GDP per capita at
purchasing power parity is double the
wealth of the United States these are
the wealthiest countries in the world
does it matter well if it didn't matter
politicians like Bernie Sanders wouldn't
be out there lying claiming that the
United States is the wealthiest country
in the world seeing the wealth and
poverty of the American people in
perspective
relative to other real-world examples
he's important it matters it's going to
inform our choices as a society as a
democracy etc etc and lying to people
and reinforcing this kind of baseless
egomaniacal delusion that the United
States is an extraordinarily wealthy
country how does that help anyone now
above and beyond the wealth or poverty
of the people there was the question of
how much the government can do here's a
comparison of the United States to
Argentina it's not debated right now
Argentina is in an economic crisis if
you look at the chart there the line
towards the very right hand side the
most recent part of the line shoots
upward it shoots upward to 86.2%
debt to GDP ratio and that's a crisis
whole country is in crisis the line
thinnest America covers a much longer
period of time it's not the same time
scale for these two charts but
nevertheless you can see within my
lifetime last 20 years the line has
gotten worse and worse the United States
also but for the United States it's now
above a hundred percent it's a hundred
and six percent so we're all willing to
recognize that Argentina has a problem
Argentina has a crisis at 86% Argentina
the government of Argentina has got to
spend less money because the amount of
tax revenue they can raise from their
people only supports a certain finite
level of spending why can't we have that
same humble recognition above the United
States of America why can't we stop
repeating this mythology that America is
the richest country in the world when
it's not even if they were the richest
country in the world even if they were
as as wealthy as Ireland or Monaco they
would still have a finite amount of
funds that can spend on these endless
interventions these wars without end
and indeed the social programs that it's
a real question also we're now looking
at proposals for new forms of health
care
new forms of social services
intervention Sweden Sweden is often
cited as a positive example of a country
where it has very high quality Social
Services is very good prisons very good
hospitals and this sort of thing Sweden
ranking fifth in a european survey of
healthcare quality the life expectancy
by the way in sweden is 81 years that's
three years more than in this country in
sweden people go to a publicly run
health care center for all medical needs
the clinics are run by the 21 separate
counties in sweden doctors work on
straight salary for the clinic
Richard Saltzman has been studying and
working with the Swedish healthcare
system for 25 years overall it's a very
effective system the Swedes consider it
to be one of the best in the world
the statistics are impressive life
expectancy of 81 years vs. 78 in the
United States
Sweden's health care costs are 9% of GDP
less than the u.s. 16 percent per capita
spending half at three thousand three
hundred and twenty three dollars versus
seven thousand two hundred ninety in the
US and there is one doctor for every two
hundred and seventy seven people
compared to one in four hundred and
sixteen for the US how much debt is
Sweden in with its very limited tax base
very small country the small population
small economy frankly thirty eight point
eight percent so is Sweden the
wealthiest country in the world is sweet
and extraordinarily wealthy the wealth
of the people the wealth of the
government the quality of life is sweet
and extraordinary or should we take the
much more humbling view that Sweden is
just ordinary and that the United States
of America and Canada are actually doing
really poorly compared to Sweden right
this myth of our extraordinariness in
the United States and in Canada it's not
just challenged by looking at these
numbers I think it's humbled in a really
useful really dynamic way Denmark is
Denmark the wealthiest country in the
world
no Denmark we should just look at as
normal but Denmark is managing to
provide extraordinarily high quality
social services extraordinarily generous
welfare state you know education for the
unemployed and so on and so far they're
famous for taking very good care of all
their disabled people all these
wonderful things
thirty-four percent debt to GDP ratio
and that's it's America over a hundred
and six and no
and insight Luxembourg the Luxembourg
was mentioned before genuinely could be
considered the wealthiest country in the
world they are if not the wealthiest
nearly so so enormous amount of money
going around in people's bank accounts
in Luxembourg somehow their government
only 21 percent debt to GDP ratio so not
just the wealth of the people the wealth
of the government is extraordinary the
government there could take on
extraordinary new projects and run up
extraordinary new debts the government
in Luxembourg is in a position to try
radical new experiments with ecology
radical new experiments with healthcare
radical new experiments with land reform
helping the poor or something in the
United States of America he's not the
United States America is very
fundamentally in a much more fragile
position not as bad as Argentina but
still you should be open to learning
from experience learning from the
disaster that's still ongoing energy
Tawan Tawan has a very active muscular
government its spends a lot of money on
the military it's in a constant state of
war with communist china next door cold
war or low-level war whatever you want
to say it has to fight for its
independence it spends a lot of money on
health care it's means a lot of money on
education so in service but only 30%
30.9% I should say debt to GDP ratio
right very powerful economy in some ways
a tremendously affluent society there is
almost zero poverty in Taiwan even
though you know they don't show up at
the top of the chart anywhere near
Luxembourg they're not anywhere near
Ireland even all right in some ways
Taiwan is really a more affluent society
than it says American they're in a much
better position for the government to
take on new projects on a massive scale
whether that's building new railroads
new ecological initiatives new health
care system you name it right and
finally let's just take a brief glance
at the nemesis of the United States
America and foreign policy Russia Russia
is a tiny economy compared the United
States of America their economy is about
the same sizes Italy right they're tiny
they're not economically powerful
they're not mighty but somehow somehow
they're managing to sustain their army
they're military you know engagement in
Syria and so on without bankrupting
themselves while the United States is
106 percent debt to GDP ratio Russia is
only 13.5 percent I'm old and let me
tell you something I don't go on for any
of this stuff of saying I'm young at
heart I'm over 40 years old and I'm old
at heart but there's one important
respect in which I managed to avoid the
narrow mindedness of middle age and that
is that I'm constantly aware of and
constantly challenging myself on these
types of thought terminating cliches
becomes a cliche that America is the
richest country in the world that Canada
is one of the wealthiest countries in
the world people say it over and over
again sometimes using it sincerely to
call on American politician stance to a
higher standard
sometimes using it cynically to justify
one political decision over another one
policy direction over another sometimes
it's used to justify ignoring millions
and millions of dollars being spent on
military adventures overseas the first
lesson that all of us should learn from
this example is to live with this
discipline in our own lives of
questioning investigating challenging
and overturning the things that we
presume to be true for just a couple of
months I got into the habit of saying
that Sweden has one of the greatest
educational systems in the world and I
remember the exact history of how I got
that idea I'm cursed with an acumen
right and I stopped just a few weeks ago
and thought you know what I never really
did any reading or investigation I
looked into it and I found out the
education system in Sweden has some
really serious problems
it really does they're they've made some
really bad choices they actually have
really serious political questions to
ask themselves and a really serious
challenge of reform now and trying to
save the Swedish education system it has
some advantages okay that was
eye-opening that was educational all
right I'm not gonna go on into my
middle-age into
my 50s and into my 60s repeating that in
an unsure way when the truth is you know
somehow all that crept in is an
assumption that Sweden is a really
positive example and you look into it
and you say well you know what there's a
lot we can learn from the history of
what happened with the Swedish education
system but it ain't all good it's what
you're gonna hear from Sweden my warning
here is not specific to the left-wing
it's not specific to the right-wing it's
not specific to the moderate Center no
matter who you are no matter what your
concerns are no matter what your
aspirations are for a better society
don't let people bully you with these
stated assumptions about what everybody
knows don't let them bully you and don't
let yourself sink into this habit of
mind of invoking conventional wisdom
that cannot be challenged when people
try to tell you everybody knows that
policies about getting tough on drugs
don't work when people tell you
everybody knows that in Portugal and
Switzerland they made heroin and cocaine
legal and it completely solved the drug
problem right these are things put no
tumor people have said to me everybody
knows and it's like a 5-minute Google
search just a little bit of reading and
you start to figure out hey you know
what we can learn some things from drug
policy in Switzerland we can learn some
things from drug policy in Portugal it
all positive it ain't okay gee you know
what make some bad choices in Portugal
yeah you know what
drug policy in Los Angeles the United
States may be a disaster hmm what about
drug policy in Singapore what about drug
policy in communist China what if there
are some other lessons to be learned
here don't let people bully you with
what seemed to be self-evident truths
like this idea that the United States of
America is the wealthiest country in the
world like this idea
the United States of America has
unlimited tax dollars it just takes a
little bit of google searching a little
bit of challenging yourself of educating
yourself and when you live by that
standard when you really do hold
yourself to that higher standard I think
it's fair for you to go around with an
open heart and an open mind and
challenge others to live up to it also
to say to others hey look I'm engaged in
questioning how I know things I'm
engaged in examining my own assumptions
and where they come from I'm still out
here learning new things at age 41 or
whatever age you happen to be so why not
you - why can't you step it up and move
past invoking these thought terminating
cliches these cliches that serve to put
an end to rational discourse and hem you
in and define the world for you why not
say hey wait a minute
how do we know the things that we think
we know maybe if we just examine them a
little bit maybe we're gonna find that
what gets said behind a podium by
politicians those aren't things we
really know
[Music]